Project model is fundamentally flawed - Projects deliver exactly what they promise. Project teams have little incentive to invest in the long term operation and maintenance of the systems that they create.
http://evan.bottch.com/2010/08/29/projects-are-evil-and-must-be-destroyed/

"Facebook’s Engineering" - Product managers want teams to “own their code,” to put more intention and responsibility behind any changes they make.
“This is about understanding that there is some level of permanence in the code you ship,” product manager Michael Sharon told me. “This is educating our people about quality.”
http://allthingsd.com/20121109/own-your-code-facebooks-engineering-shift-tackles-the-problem-of-mobile/

http://www.svproduct.com/dedicated-product-teams/

In this model, the executives, rather than debating specific projects, instead consider which areas of the business they want to invest in, and what percentage of resources to allocate to each area.  For example, for a typical e-commerce company, they might have teams like “Search and Recommendations,” “Product Pages and SEO,” “Fulfillment Systems,” “Infrastructure,” “Rapid Response” and “New Business Opportunities.”  They would then choose what level of investment they consider appropriate for each area.

The next step for the management team in this model is to define Product Team Scorecards for each of the teams.  This essentially sets the business priorities for each of the teams.


## The Surgical Team.

http://www.dfpug.de/loseblattsammlung/online/workshop/design_patterns/sonstiges.htm

The __surgeon__ is the chief programmer and the el-presidente of the whole team. He produces all the specifications, codes the entire system the team is responsible for, tests it, and drafts its supporting documentation.

The __copilot__ is the surgeon’s assistant. His main purpose is to share in the thinking about design issues – to serve as a sounding board, as it were. The copilot represents the team in meetings with other teams. He knows the code intimately, and serves as insurance in case of disaster to the surgeon.

The __toolsmith__ supports the surgeon and builds specialized utilities and tools as may be required by his surgeon. Each team has its dedicated toolsmith in addition to any central services provided by the rest of the project infrastructure.

The __tester__ is responsible for maintaining test cases for testing the surgeon’s work as he writes it. He is both an adversary who devises test cases to measure against the formal specs and devises test data to be used in debugging.

The __language lawyer__, which can serve several surgeons, I a widely consulted specialist who delights in the mastery of the intricacies of the programming languages and the operating systems upon which the software must perform.              

The __administrator__ handles money, people, space, and machines. The surgeon is the ultimate boss, with the last word on all these issues, but the day to day management of the issues and interfacing with the administrative machinery of the project is the role of a professional administrator. One administrator may serve more than one team.

The __editor__ edits and revises the documentation as drafted or dictated by the surgeon and oversees the mechanics of its production.

The __program clerk__, trained as a secretary, is responsible for maintaining all the  machine-readable and human-readable technical records generated by the team. All the filing and indexing is the responsibility of the program clerk.

The __secretaries__ handle the project correspondence and non-project files.

Whether of not the surgical team structure works for you conceptually, it’s interesting to note the very high ratio of supporters to coders in this structure. I reckon the ratio is 2 or 3 to 1 depending on how many members support multiple teams. This ratio isn’t unusual as evidenced by the recent works of Steve McConnell (Code Complete and Debugging the Development Process) from Microsoft press.

Does your company have a 2:1 supporter to developer ratio? Probably not. It probably should.
